---
layout: page-fullwidth
title: "The fplot program"
permalink: "/docs/misc/fplot/"
header: no
---
_____________________________________________________________


### _Purpose_
{:.no_toc}

**fplot**{: style="color: blue"} is a general purpose plotting package, with functionality similar to **gnuplot**{: style="color: blue"}.
It is provided here because the tool synchronises smoothly with the rest of the Questaal codes such as **plbnds**{: style="color: blue"}
and **pldos**{: style="color: blue"}.  

For standard functions such as plotting bands or densities-of-states, tutorials use **gnuplot**{: style="color: blue"} or **fplot**{: style="color: blue"};

For some purposees **fplot**{: style="color: blue"} provides some functionality not readily obtained in **gnuplot**{: style="color: blue"}, e.g.
to determine cyclotron masses, plotting bands with color weights, and using the programming language features of the Questaal suite.

_____________________________________________________________

### _Table of Contents_
{:.no_toc}
*  Auto generated table of contents
{:toc}  

### 1. _Preliminaries_

It is assumed that you have **fplot**{: style="color: blue"} in your path.  

You will need some capability to display postscript files.   **fplot**{: style="color: blue"} generates a file _fplot.ps_{: style="color: green"}.

_____________________________________________________________

### 2. _Introduction_

**fplot**{: style="color: blue"} is mainly design to draw _xy_ data; it has some capability for contour plots and a very limited ability
for 3D graphics.

**fplot**{: style="color: blue"} is command-line driven and can efficiently generate figures from command-line arguments.  It can also read
arguments from a file script; this is necessary if the figure is complex.  **fplot**{: style="color: blue"} can make full use of the programming
language capability it has for reading input files, both in the script and in data files.

Other programs, especially **plbnd**{: style="color: blue"} and **pldos**{: style="color: blue"}, make **fplot**{: style="color: blue"}
script to make the process of drawing bands and figures very easy and efficient, with the capability of refining the figure by tuning the
autogenerated plotting script.

Before entering into the sizeable number of command-line arguments **fplot**{: style="color: blue"} will accept, 
a couple of examples are given; this gives you an intuitive feel of how the code operates.

### 2.1 _Example: plot $$x^2*exp(-4x)$$_

### _Other resources_

The source code to **ccomp**{: style="color: blue"} can be found [here](https://bitbucket.org/lmto/lm/src/e82e155d8ce7eb808a9a6dca6d8eea5f5a095bd6/startup/ccomp.c).
